A $1.7 Trillion Stock Rally Fails to Wipe Out ‘Korea Discount’
South Korean stocks have yet to close their long-held discount against peers even after a $1.7 trillion rally, with earnings growth making a case for the world-beating advance to continue, money managers say.

The Kospi Index has more than doubled since the start of 2025, fueled by President Lee Jae Myung’s drive to eliminate the “Korea discount” — a perennial markdown tied to governance issues — and a global artificial intelligence boom. Valuations have improved but are barely keeping up with profit forecasts, according to investors at Jupiter Fund Management and Matthews Asia.

The still-cheap valuations are behind Wall Street’s bullish views on Kospi this year, with JPMorgan Chase & Co. projecting as much as 7,500 — a more than 41% rise from here. The prerequisite, analysts say, is further progress in corporate governance reforms. There’s also room for the rally to broaden, given the gains so far have been driven by Samsung Electronics Co. and SK Hynix Inc., leaving a large swathe of the market with limited valuation boost.

“While the discount has narrowed, Korea continues to trade at a significant valuation gap in my view,” said Sojung Park, a portfolio manager at Matthews Asia. “In the context of its strong earnings growth profile and underlying fundamentals, the market appears even more undervalued.”

Following a 121% gain since the start of 2025, the Kospi now trades at 1.7 times its book value, from below a ratio of one less than a year ago. That compares with 1.9 for Japan’s Topix and 1.8 for China’s CSI 300. The broader Korean market has added $1.7 trillion in market cap during the period.

Christian Heck, a portfolio manager at First Eagle Investments, sees “room for normalization” as the country continues to trade at a modest discount to markets like Japan, despite similar reform initiatives.

That Korea remains far from fair valuation is a view shared across the country’s political circles, where the push for higher shareholder returns has taken hold.

The ruling Democratic Party chief Jung Chung-rae said last week that Korea’s price-to-book ratio is far below the average of about three for advanced economies — and called for a Korea premium next.

The discount is starker when factoring in earnings outlook. Profits for Kospi members are expected to more than double in the coming 12 months, according to estimates compiled by Bloomberg. That contrasts to gains of 12% expected for Japan’s Topix members and around 24% for CSI 300 firms.

Kospi’s ascent has largely been a story of two chipmakers. Shares of Samsung have tripled and SK Hynix’s quintupled since early 2025, driven by a record shortfall in the memory chips that form the backbone of the global AI supply chain.

Yet even after contributing to more than half of the benchmark’s advance during the period, the two chipmakers remain relatively cheap. Samsung trades at 7.9 and SK Hynix at 5.7 times forward earnings, compared with a ratio of 19 for Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. and 24 for Nvidia Corp.

“Samsung Electronics has had a very strong share price recently, but still trades at a very low PE multiple,” said Sam Konrad, an investment manager at Singapore-based Jupiter Fund Management. The stock “would probably re-rate if they paid out a higher proportion of their earnings in dividends.”

Korean bulls expect the rally to extend as the push for corporate governance reforms gathers pace, with the next likely step a mandatory cancelation of treasury shares via the commercial act revision.

Still, investors will need to be convinced that there is “buy-in” from the sprawling family-run conglomerates which have long been an integral part of the economy, said Indrani De, global head of investment research at FTSE Russell.

“Chaebols are a dominant feature of Korean corporates, which has led to complex cross-shareholdings, weaker protections for minority shareholders, and low dividend yields compared to regional peers,” said De, adding that investors want to see “the actual translations of these policy changes into ROE increases.”

Jonathan Pines, a portfolio manager at Federated Hermes, says changes to the inheritance law will be crucial as under the current criteria, controlling shareholders have an incentive to tolerate — or even engineer — depressed valuations ahead of succession.

“A bill requiring inheritance tax to be levied on net assets rather than market value, if passed, will eliminate the incentive to keep stock prices low,” Pines said. The government is seeking to change this, and if its reforms are implemented, this could at last “fully eliminate the discount.”
